summary: 

 “While there are two or three open minds on the company’s advisory group that oversees the exercise, the process appears to be fundamentally skewed against privacy and in favor of publication rights”. Its advisers include Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales who has described the right as “deeply immoral,” according to a report in the Daily Telegraph, as well as a former Spanish privacy regulator and an ex-justice minister of Germany. “It doesn’t help to throw around big, loaded words like that when you’re trying to find a convergence of views”. “I hope Google take the opportunity to use these meetings to explain its procedures and be more transparent and receptive about how it could meet the requirements of this judgment,” said Chris Pounder, director of Amberhawk, a company that trains data-protection officials. Anyone interested in attending can sign up online about two weeks before the events, Google said. 

anti\_summary: 

 Google chairman Eric Schmidt and Drummond are among the advisers who will draft a report on the ruling to discuss the implications of the court case for Internet users and news publishers and make recommendations for how the company should deal with requests to delete criminal convictions. Privacy regulators have criticized Mountain View, California-based Google’s steps to tell Web publishers when it is removing links to their sites. Regulators are drafting guidelines on how they should handle any disputes by people who were unhappy at how Google handles their initial request for links to be removed. The first event takes place in Spain, the trigger for the EU court ruling that changed Google’s business when the company fought an order by the country’s data-protection regulator to remove a link with details to a state auction of houses to cover tax debt that popped up on a search for Mario Costeja Gonzalez. Al Verney, a spokesman for Google in Brussels, said the company will hear from invited experts and also from people in the audience at the events, who could sign up on the Internet to attend. 

